---
layout:     post
title:      ThinkQ Talks CS
date:       2017-12-06 16:38:05
summary:    ThinkQ conference experience
categories: conference algorithms advantage
---

The IBM ThinkQ conference was held recently in New York, with a focus on near-term quantum computing applications.
It seems that businesses that businesses have succesfully been developing larger quantum computers
---we're at around 50 qubits now!--- but are now looking for the "killer app" of small quantum computers.
There were some variations on the "what to do with you quantum computer" theme
and I will talk about some of the applications that were discussed.

All talks and recordings of them are available at the [online schedule](https://www.research.ibm.com/ibm-q/thinkq/agenda.html).

## Quantum Advantage
A _quantum advantage_ refers to some applications where a quantum computer performs some computation
that a classical computer currently cannot perform.
Previously known as _quantum supremacy_, it has now been renamed after an internal discussion
within the community about it's political correctness.
See e.g. one of the most heated [discussions](https://scirate.com/arxiv/1705.06768) I've seen on Scirate,
which also touches on the Latin origin of the term _ancilla_ ("housemaid", colloquially: helper qubit).
While almost certainly an internet troll, _ancilla the supremacist_ has become somewhat of a joke in my environment,
so I guess it has served its purpose.

### Complexity Theory
So far we actually do not know unconditionally if quantum computing is actually more powerful than classical
(i.e. $BQP \not\subseteq BPP$).
But through the problems of Boson Sampling[^boson1] and Instanteneous Quantum Polynomial-time (IQP) circuits[^iqp1]
we do know that the polynomial hierarchy ($PH$) must collapse if classical computers can solve them efficiently.
(Simulation and visitor (Hakop)

Polynomial Hierarchy

### Boson Sampling

### Instantaneous Quantum Polynomial-time (IQP)
A second approach to showing a quantum advantage referred to as IQP is
to perform a diagonal unitary ($D$) on an input in the Hadamard basis ($\ket +, \ket -$)
that is converted back to the 'normal' computational basis ($\ket 0, \ket 1$) afterwards.
The output distribution of the circuit $\mathcal C = H^{\otimes n} D H^{\otimes n}$
turns out to be difficult to simulate for classical computers under suitable hardness assumptions.
[^iqpnoise]

[^boson1]: Aaronson, Scott, and Alex Arkhipov. "The computational complexity of linear optics." Proceedings of the forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing. ACM, 2011. {% include doi.html doi='10.1145/1993636.1993682' %}
[^iqp1]: Bremner, Michael J., Richard Jozsa, and Dan J. Shepherd. "Classical simulation of commuting quantum computations implies collapse of the polynomial hierarchy." Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. The Royal Society, 2010. {% include doi.html doi='10.1098/rspa.2010.0301' %}
[^iqpnoise]: Bremner, Michael J., Ashley Montanaro, and Dan J. Shepherd. "Achieving quantum supremacy with sparse and noisy commuting quantum computations." Quantum 1 (2017): 8. {% include doi.html doi='10.22331/q-2017-04-25-8' %}


Ashley talk
Ryan talk
Nathan wiebe
Earl Campbell
Micheal Bremner


## Applications
On the first day we had a high-level talk by Aram Harrow discussing some of the issues that
we face when finding applications that should exceed classical computers.
Usually computers are used for processing some amount of data, and reading all data will take at least $\Omega(n)$.
Therefore, if you do not have your data stored in some quantum format,
some obvious algorithms, such as searching through a database with Grover search,
will actually be bound by this data read-out.
For example, if we wish to find a 1 in a pile of data, it takes $O(\sqrt n)$ after
reading out all bits in $O(n)$, resulting in just an $O(n)$ algorithm.
Obviously, we would rather distribute this over classical data processors
since that would have the same asymptotics and be much faster.

Aram Harrow
Eddie Farhi
Andrew Childs
Robin Kothari
Garnet Chan

## Conclusion
Talks at qip 2018: bravyi gosset, koenig; Neville et al.; Clifford & Clifford
